Processing a Seismic Volume
===========================

This example shows some processing using DistArray on a simulated seismic
volume.  The volume can be stored either as an HDF5 file, or as a set of .dnpy
files.

If you have an MPI-enabled HDF5 library, you can use that for loading and
saving these files.  Otherwise you can use our .dnpy flat file format with no
external dependencies.  By default the HDF5 file format is used, but you can
pass ``--dnpy`` as a command line argument to both scripts to use the flat file
format instead.

create_volume.py
----------------

This script creates a simulated seismic volume.  The internal structure of the
volume includes two 'horizons', which are plane surfaces inside the volume.  As
one moves down in depth, approaching and then crossing the horizon, the data
values increase with a Gaussian peak at the horizon and then settle down to a
larger value than above the horizon.

If you would like array dimensions other than the default, you can pass
``--size NX NY NZ`` as command line arguments to get a volume with shape (NX,
NY, NZ).  Other values in the script can also be modified to change the values
in the volume array.

The seismic volume is written either to a .hdf5 file named seismic.hdf5 or a
set of .dnpy files named seismic_0.dnpy, seismic_1.dnpy, and so on.

load_volume.py
--------------

This script loads the volume and performs several processing steps on it.
First, the seismic volume is loaded in parallel into a DistArray.  The script
then loops over all of the traces (z-slices constant in x and y) and calculates
some statistics on each trace (i.e. min, max, average, and standard deviation).
Next, the script applies a couple of filters on each trace.  The first filter
is a 3-point average, and the second filter is a 3-point maximum.  Then, the
script extracts three slices from the seismic volume on all three principal
axes and creates a plot for each slice.  The script also extracts slices and
makes plots from the result of the 3-point average filter.  Finally, the result
of the 3-point average filter is written out to a .hdf5 file and to a set of
.dnpy files.

The script will also perform many of these operations using NumPy directly and
check that it gets the same results as when operating on the distributed array.

seismic_volume.ipynb
--------------------

This is a simplified version of the above example as an IPython notebook.
