--------
Reflecto
--------

`From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reflecto>`__

Reflecto
~~~~~~~~

Publisher
    DC Comics

First appearance
    Adventure Comics #354 (March 1967) (memorial statue)
    
Characteristics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Species
    I: Kryptonian

Affiliations
    Legion of Superheroes

Notable aliases
    I: Superboy

Abilities
    Superhuman strength, speed, stamina and invulnerability, freezing
    breath, super hearing, multiple extrasensory and vision powers, longevity,
    flight, and regeneration

Reflecto is a fictional superhero from DC Comics who first appeared as a statue
of a dead Legion of Super-Heroes member in Adventure Comics #354 (March 1967).
He was "Killed in a duel with the Molecule Master."

This appearance was in the "Adult Legion" story, which purported to depict the
Legion farther in the future than the regular Legion series. For many years
Legion stories would be published that introduced into regular Legion
continuity elements originally found in this story.

In the early 1970's, Dave Cockrum planned a Legion spinoff series called the
Outsiders, which would have, among other characters, included Nightcrawler (who
was later introduced in the X-Men) and Reflecto, in his first appearance as a
living character. This series was not produced, however.

Reflecto was first introduced as a character in Legion of Super-Heroes issues
#277-#280 published in July 1981. His initial appearance suggested that he was
Ultra Boy with amnesia. Reflecto was soon revealed to be Superboy partly
possessed by the apparently dead Ultra Boy and suffering from a form of amnesia
brought on by his inadvertent disobedience to a post-hypnotic command implanted
in his mind by Saturn Girl. The post-hypnotic command forbade Superboy to ever
return to the 30th century, and was given to prevent Superboy from altering
history after learning the time and cause of the deaths of Jonathan and Martha
Kent.

After unknowingly arriving in the 30th century, Superboy found himself on a
world with very high gravity. His super powers were somewhat diminished, and he
could not immediately leave the planet. He encountered a very powerful beast,
which attacked him repeatedly until Superboy discovered that it was attracted
to the colors of his hair and uniform (everything on the planet was
reddish-orange). To end the attacks, Superboy used his heat vision to fuse the
planet's reddish sand to his hair and uniform, thereby changing their color.

After some time, he was able to leave the planet, but he didn't know where he
was. He was also unaware that he had travelled through time. Upon discovery
that he was in the 30th century, the conflict with the post-hypnotic command
caused a form of extreme denial/amnesia. This, combined with his now
unrecognizable appearance led to the formation of the Reflecto identity. In his
mind, if he wasn't Superboy, then he was not in violation of the post-hypnotic
command.

Reflecto was revealed to be Superboy when threw himself in front of an energy
discharge intended to kill Phantom Girl. The intense energy vaporized the fused
sand from the indestructible kryptonian fabric and revealed the "S" insignia on
his uniform. Saturn Girl then removed the command and restored his mind.
Superboy returned to his own time and agreed not to return to the 30th century.

The statue of the "dead" Ultra Boy in the Legion's hall of dead Legionnaires
was changed into one of Reflecto, fulfilling the description of the future in
the Adult Legion story.

In Legion of Super-Heroes v4 annual #1, which happened after continuity changes
erased Superboy from history, Reflecto is shown as an actual person in a
one-panel flashback. The 2995 Legion of Superheroes Sourcebook, which was
written by the writers of the Legion series but was not necessarily official,
explains that this Reflecto was killed by the Molecule Master.
