a_voice a_voice
alliser alliser
alliser_thorne alliser
arya arya
arya_stark arya
barristan barristan
barristan_selmy barristan
benjen benjen
benjen_stark benjen
bran bran
bran_stark bran
bronn bronn
cassel cassel
catelyn catelyn
catelyn_stark catelyn
cersei cersei
cersei_baratheon cersei
daenerys daenerys
daenerys_targaryen daenerys
doreah doreah
eddard_stark ned
gared gared
gendry gendry
grand_maester_pycelle pycelle
grenn grenn
guard guard
guard1 guard1
guard2 guard2
illyrio illyrio
irri irri
jaime jaime
jaime_lannister jaime
janos_slynt janos_slynt
jeor_mormont jeor_mormont
jhiqui jhiqui
joffrey joffrey
joffrey_baratheon joffrey
jon jon
jon_snow jon
jorah jorah
jorah_mormont jorah
jory jory
jory_cassel jory
khal_drogo khal_drogo
king_robert robert
lancel lancel
lancel_lannister lancel
littlefinger littlefinger
loras loras
luwin luwin
lysa lysa
maester_aemon maester_aemon
maester_luwin luwin
maid maid
man man
marillion marillion
masha_heddle masha_heddle
mhaegen mhaegen
mord mord
mycah mycah
myrcella myrcella
myrcella_baratheon myrcella
ned ned
old_nan old_nan
petyr_baelish littlefinger
pycelle pycelle
pyp pyp
rakharo rakharo
rast rast
renly renly
renly_baratheon renly
rhakaro rhakaro
robb robb
robb_stark robb
robert robert
robert_baratheon robert
robin robin
rodrick rodrick
rodrick_cassel rodrick
rodrik rodrick
ros ros
royce royce
sam sam
samwell_tarly sam
sandor the_hound
sandor_clegane the_hound
sansa sansa
sansa_stark sansa
septa_mordane septa_mordane
soldier soldier
steward steward
syrio_forel syrio_forel
the_hound the_hound
theon theon
theon_greyjoy theon
tobho_mott tobho_mott
tyrion tyrion
tyrion_lannister tyrion
vardis vardis
varys varys
vayrs varys
viserys viserys
viserys_targaryen viserys
waymar_royce royce
will will
yoren yoren
