
'''We're moving! The new Mercurial repository may be found [http://gthc.org/projects/notmm/repo here].'''

[[TOC]]

Welcome to the notmm project wiki!

notmm is a multi-purpose, heterogenous (non-monolithic), WSGI-based web toolkit on top of [http://djangoproject.com/ Django].

In short, this library ultimate goal is simply to provide a comprehensive set of tools to develop well-designed Django and/or Paste-based apps. 

== Features ==

 * A generic mako-based render_response view (in notmm.wsgi.utils.mako_render_response)
 * No (more) templates bundled in the standard source distribution! (New!)
 * Contextual session support (New!) (See [wiki:ScopedSession])
 * Support for setuptools and distribution packaging in Egg format (work in progress) 
 * API documentation available in reStructuredText and HTML (work in progress)
 
== Download ==

=== Past release (0.2.9) ===

The first ever release (phycocyanine) may be obtained from
[http://pypi.python.org/packages/source/n/notmm/notmm-0.2.9.tar.gz here]. ([source:/tags/notmm-0.2.9/RELEASE-NOTES-0.2.9 RELEASE-NOTES-0.2.9]) ([source:/tags/notmm-0.2.9/ChangeLog ChangeLog]) ([source:/tags/notmm-0.2.9/README README])


=== Development branch (0.2.10) ===

{{{
 $ hg clone http://gthc.org/projects/notmm/repo notmm
}}}
That command should creates a fresh work copy of the 0.2.10 branch.

Alternatively, use:

{{{
 $ hg clone -r 0.2.10p2 http://gthc.org/projects/notmm/repo notmm-0.2.10p2
}}}

For cloning a work copy of the 0.2.10p2 tag.

 

== Getting started ==

''This section is very oldish and inaccurate. Adventurous readers are encouraged to read initial instructions in [source:/trunk/INSTALL INSTALL].'' 

 * [wiki:Install] - Installation tutorial (start-here!)
 * [wiki:Configuration] - How to configure and build a site distribution 
 * [wiki:Cookbook] - Unofficial applications cookbook (TODO)

== Development ==
 
New features being developed in my spare time.. ;-)

 * ~~notmm.adapters.DjangoSettingsAdapter - Experimental adapter for configuring a Django app w/PasteDeploy~~
 * notmm.wsgi.response.WSGIResponse - A experimental WSGI response subclass based on Paste ([http://pythonpaste.org/webob/WebOb WebOb]) and PEP-333 
 * notmm.utils.template - New template loader module based on mako
 * notmm.models - New Django model implementation; An excuse for not yet studying SQLAlchemy.. 

Features being marked as deprecated/obsolete:

 * Hm, sure there should be some.. 

=== Reusable Django-based applications ===

 * apps.blogs - A blogging module with partial [http://www.tinymce.org/ TinyMCE] support
 * apps.polls - A lightweight Polls/voting package 
 * apps.sandbox  - Dummy package I use mainly for testing and development purposes
 * apps.newadmin - Replacement package for django.contrib.admin (Experimental and kludgy!) 

Please see the [source:/trunk/src/lib/apps/README README] for the list of packages included
with the source distribution. 
 
=== Demo site ===

~~A early demo is available here: http://frutz.dnsdojo.net:8080/stn-technical-blog/~~

This demo (err, weblog) currently implements the [source:/trunk/src/lib/apps/blogs apps.blogs] app. 


== See also ==
 
 * [http://www.djangoproject.com/]
 * [http://www.pythonpaste.org/]
 * [http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0333/]
 * [http://www.makotemplates.org/]
 * [http://www.sqlalchemy.org/]
 * [http://groups.google.com/group/notmm-discuss/ The official notmm-discuss group!]
 * [http://pypi.python.org/pypi/notmm/ Project page on PyPI] 

----
For a complete list of local wiki pages, see TitleIndex.

Trac is brought to you by [http://www.edgewall.com/ Edgewall Software],
providing professional Linux and software development services to clients
worldwide. Visit http://www.edgewall.com/ for more information.
