========================
Motivation for asteval
========================

The asteval module provides a means to evaluate a large subset of the
Python language from within a python program, without using
:py:func:`eval`.  It is, in effect, a limited version of Python's built-in
:py:func:`eval` that is more restricted, forbidding several actions, and
using using a simple dictionary as a flat namespace.  A completely fair
question is: Why on earth would anyone do this?  That is, why not simply
use :py:func:`eval`, or just use Python itself.

The short answer is that sometimes you want to allow evaluation of user
input, or expose a simple calculator inside a larger application.  For
this, :py:func:`eval` is pretty scary, as it exposes *all* of Python, which
can make user input difficult to trust.  Since asteval does not support the
**import** statement (or many other constructs), user code cannot access
the :py:mod:`os` and :py:mod:`sys` modules or any functions or classes
outside the provided symbol table.

Other missing features (modules, classes, lambda, yield, generators) are
similarly motivated.  The idea for asteval is to make a simple procedural,
mathematically-oriented language that can be embedded safely into larger
applications.

In fact, the asteval module grew out the the need for a simple expression
evaluator for scientific applications.  A first attempt using pyparsing,
but was error-prone and difficult to maintain.  It turned out that using
the Python ast module is so easy that adding more complex programming
constructs like conditionals, loops, exception handling, complex assignment
and slicing, and even function definition and running was fairly simple
implement.  Importantly, because parsing is done by the :py:mod:`ast`
module, a whole class of implementation errors disappears -- valid python
expression will be parsed correctly and converted into an Abstract Syntax
Tree.  Furthermore, the resulting AST is easy to walk through, greatly
simplifying evaluation over any other approach.  What started as a desire
for a simple expression evaluator grew into a quite useable procedural
domain-specific language for mathematical applications.

Asteval makes no claims about speed. Obviously,  evaluating the ast tree
involves a lot of function calls, and will likely be slower than Python.
In preliminary tests, it's about 4x slower than Python.

How Safe is asteval?
=======================

I'll be completely honest:  I don't know.

If you're looking for guarantees that malicious code cannot ever cause
damage, you're definitely looking in the wrong place.  I don't suggest that
asteval is completely safe, only that it is safer than the builtin
:py:func:`eval`, and that you might find it useful.

For why :py:func:`eval` is dangerous, see, for example `Eval is really
dangerous
<http://nedbatchelder.com/blog/201206/eval_really_is_dangerous.html>`_ and
the comments and links therein.  Clearly, making :py:func:`eval` perfectly
safe from malicious user input is a difficult prospect.  Basically, if one
can cause Python to seg-fault, safety cannot be guaranteed.

Asteval is meant to be safer than the builtin :py:func:`eval`, and does try
to avoid any known exploits.  Many actions are not allowed from the asteval
interpreter, including:

  * importing modules.  Neither 'import' nor '__import__' is supported.
  * create classes or modules.
  * access to Python's :py:func:`eval`, :py:func:`execfile`,
    :py:func:`getattr`, :py:func:`hasattr`, :py:func:`setattr`, and
    :py:func:`delattr`.

In addition (and following the discussion in the link above), the following
attributes are blacklisted for all objects, and cannot be accessed:

   __subclasses__, __bases__, __globals__, __code__, __closure__, __func__,
   __self__, __module__, __dict__, __class__, __call__, __get__,
   __getattribute__, __subclasshook__, __new__, __init__, func_globals,
   func_code, func_closure, im_class, im_func, im_self, gi_code, gi_frame


Of course, this approach of making a blacklist cannot be guaranteed to be
complete, but it does eliminate classes of attacks to seg-fault the Python
interpreter.  Of course, asteval will typically expose numpy ufuncs from the
numpy module, and several of these can seg-fault Python without too much
trouble.  If you're paranoid about safe user input that can never cause a
segmentation fault, you'll want to disable the use of numpy.

There are important categories of safety that asteval does not even attempt
to address. The most important of these is resource hogging.  There is no
timeout on any calculation, and so a reasonable looking calculation such as::

   >>> from asteval import Interpreter
   >>> aeval = Interpreter()
   >>> txt = """nmax = 1e8
   ... a = sqrt(arange(nmax)
   ... """
   >>> aeval.eval(txt)


can take a noticeable amount of CPU time.  It it not hard to come up with
short program that can run for hundreds of years, which probably exceeds
your threshold for an acceptable run-time.

In summary, there are many ways that asteval could be considered part of an
un-safe programming environment.  Recommendations for how to improve this
situation would be greatly appreciated.
